---
layout: text
lang: en
title: Federal statehood for Puerto Rico is unacceptable.
author: pedro-albizu-campos
author_name: Pedro Albizu Campos
date: 1923-01-01
source: Obras Escogidas 1923-1936 (Selected Works)
source_detail: "Pedro Albizu Campos, Obras Escogidas 1923-1936, Tomo I (San Juan: Editorial Jelofe, 1975)"
country: puerto-rico
permalink: /en/texts/pedro-albizu-campos/estado-federal-puerto-rico-no-aceptable-destruira-nuestra
spanish_version: /es/textos/pedro-albizu-campos/estado-federal-puerto-rico-no-aceptable-destruira-nuestra
collections:
  - nacionalismo-puertorriqueno
  - independencia-puerto-rico
  - discursos
---

IMPORTANT POLITICAL ACT Political Declaration of Lcdo. Albizu Campos Recently a political meeting took place in the city of Ponce where the leaders of the Union and prestigious people from the majority party were present. Among those attending the meeting were Mr. Guillermo Schuck, Vicente Usera, Guillermo Vives Valdivieso, Mr. Ohms, Mr. McJones, Lcdo. Brunet and other significant elements within the party. Before a huge audience, in which capital, intelligence and labor were represented, the cultured young lawyer Pedro Albizu Campos, with degrees in philosophy and letters, and law from Harvard University, Massachusetts, after having studied in great detail the actions of the parties in the country, decided to formally enter the ranks of the Union Party of Puerto Rico. Mr. Cordero Matos, a significant political figure in Ponce, introduced Lcdo. Albizu Campos, who began his speech, which could well be considered an athenaeum lecture, and whose most salient points were more or less as follows: "Mr. Albizu Campos affirmed in a calm manner and with absolute mastery of the subject he was going to treat, that he was known as a nationalist in the United States where he held several conferences on small nationalities and the imperialism of the great powers. That the Puerto Rican Republican party would always agitate within a minority, because it is a centralist party and wants to receive its Executive power from Washington without relying on the regionalism that is so necessary to found a "state" of the federation. Upon reaching this point, the speaker skillfully, eloquently and clearly distinguished the confederation from the federation, explaining that confederation is nothing more than true sovereign states linked almost always only for defense against outsiders and cites as an example the United States before the current Constitution, and federation is the state in the central unit. That the so-called states lack sovereignty; the sovereign is the United States, and not any state by itself or in aggregate with the others, something that it could not do even if it tried and cites the United States as an example. The speaker explains the consequences saying that the federation requires, as a unit that it is, homogeneity in its constituent parts and that is why no community has been admitted to the federation in which the Anglo-Saxon or Anglo-Celtic element, which has given shape to the nation, has not been governing, and unless the ancestry of said elements has been probable. That the ascendancy of these groups among us is impossible due to the density of our population and because Puerto Rico possesses a civilization older than that of the United States. The speaker said that this was the tradition of that people and the basis of its expansion and that it could not be asked to overturn the foundation of its existence; that for Puerto Rico it would be, as it has been for each "state", the extinction of its personality, understanding by this, what is distinctive in a people in the community of sovereign states in the world. The young lawyer then discoursed about the citizen in its confederative aspect and said that, since each state is sovereign in fact and in law, it is the only sovereign over its citizens and that since the federation is the only sovereign, it is the sovereign of each citizen, and of course, it orders him according to its interpretation of the needs of the sovereign; and can mobilize citizens within each "state" to destroy it if it deems it necessary for the sole sovereignty, citing as an example the civil war in the United States from 1861-65. Referring to the socialist party, the young speaker said that this party only adheres to an economic program, being indifferent to the personality of Puerto Rico, so necessary for the development of any economic program that wants to be put into practice. That such a party postulates the class struggle, dividing our people who require a joint effort for their salvation. He also alluded to the nascent Nationalist Party of Puerto Rico and said that it sadly divides the regional forces. He also spoke about the Jones Bill calling it the myth of the rights contained therein and affirmed categorically and within an irrefutable logic, that the right is right, when its "ultimate" sanction is in the community that exercises it. The Jones Bill, said the speaker to the audience, has lengthened the procedure in the approval of laws; but its substance is identical to that of the Foraker Bill. All legislation, no matter how beneficial it may be to the country, ultimately stumbles upon the "absolute veto" of the President of the United States. The agents of the Executive of the Nation in Puerto Rico, who are incapacitated, easily reveal this truth and that is why they are not as harmful as a cultured and intelligent agent, who can disguise the true source of power, and hence the imperative need to work so that Puerto Rico has, within the right that assists it, a government responsible only to it and elected by it and that the ultimate sanction of all its laws is in our people: and hence it is not the removal of an agent of the executive power of the United States and of the policy that by its instruction it develops, because that would be to leave the sacred rights of our people at the mercy of individuals in the Presidency: the important thing is to struggle tenaciously with faith and patriotism for the repeal of the current Organic Charter, replacing it with a Constitution that establishes a government responsible only to our people. Finally, the young speaker advised the need to abandon, to banish the bad habit of supplication and petition; that Puerto Rico must demand what rightfully belongs to it, belongs to it and then and only then, will it deserve the respect and admiration of the peoples who have struggled to perfect their personality, as the people of the United States themselves have done." "THE FEDERAL STATE FOR P.R. IS NOT ACCEPTABLE BECAUSE IT WILL DESTROY OUR COLLECTIVE PERSONALITY" We must not and cannot dispense with the socialists, adds Lcdo. Albizu Campos Our correspondent in Ponce has held the following important interview with Lcdo. Pedro Albizu Campos. These people from Ponce deserve our sincere congratulations for their noble effort. We must distinguish the political collectivity from the political parties. The political collectivity is necessarily indivisible. It contains the indisputable basis of the Homeland. It requires unanimous consensus. It cannot be discussed without endangering the existence of the country. Political parties limit themselves to offering means to maintain and enhance the foundations laid for national existence. The republic or the monarchy, being dependent or independent, are forms of political existence, which cannot be attacked where they exist without endangering public safety and without paralyzing all activities, except political ones, with the consequent regression or stagnation in the other orders. In our country there is no consensus regarding the basis of its life as a political entity, and hence the reason why we consume our best efforts in what we call politics. Each party offers a basis that it believes is indisputable and fundamental enough to build a great Homeland upon it. Each one goes to the bottom and is a true adversary of the others. We must not forget this fact if we want to reach an understanding regarding our status. To illustrate the problem, let us note that in the United States there is practical unanimity regarding national sovereignty and regarding the representative form of government. The large parties differ in procedure, with the exception of the socialist, which touches the bottom again, and that is why they treat it as a dangerous adversary. However, a single political party is not possible. All Puerto Ricans must unite to demand the status that we believe is worthy. It would be unfair as well as imprudent to exclude the socialists. They represent an attitude that is increasing and this factor of opinion must be recognized in order to demand responsibility from them when it is their turn to administer public affairs. To win in the upcoming elections, the Unionist Party does not need any understandings with any party. We will never deserve the respect of a free people like the American people if we continue ASKING what should be done with us. We must seek the legal means, the sanction of Congress if necessary, to meet in a Constituent Congress, which will draft the constitution that it deems worthy for our people. We will have powers and we will be responsible. In that way all discussion regarding our status will end. No colonial regime is acceptable in a country like ours, of a civilization older than that of its rulers and of a culture at least equal to that of these. The Federal State formula is not acceptable because it would destroy our collective personality. Much has been said about the personality and sovereignty of the so-called States of the Union. They had that when they were CONFEDERATED and lost it when they FEDERATED upon adopting the current Constitution in 1787. In the political sense, in the United States, there is one personality: the American one and one sovereign: the United States. I do not believe that the Federal State is possible. National unity requires homogeneity in the element that must govern in each "state". This element has to be Anglo-Saxon or Anglo-Celtic, because it is the one that has shaped the nation. No community has been admitted to the union until this element has gained definitive ascendancy In Puerto Rico that is impossible due to our geographical isolation, due to the density of population, due to having a culture as high as or higher than the North American one, and due to being a people that tenaciously defends its history and its civilization. I do not know of any overseas Federal "state" in the United States. No. The socialist party must be disarmed with economic concessions. The vast majority is unaware of the political, philosophical and religious theories that inspired socialism. What they want is material well-being, and opportunity to educate themselves, to which the one who works has perfect right. I believe that the Republican party will end up failing unless it joins another party if the government of Washington continues to insist that this party should exist through suffrage instead of wanting to depend on the central power. I find the coalition with the socialists dangerous for it due to the determined opposition that the federal government makes to them. The power of the socialist party depends on economic malaise, let us attack this and that one will disappear. As long as it lasts as a party and recognized as such, it has the right to participate in the Administration where the electorate authorizes it, only then can it be held responsible. PEDRO ALBIZU CAMPOS Ponce, P.R., May 31, 1923. PEDRO ALBIZU CAMPOS JOINT RESOLUTION NUMBER 23 TO MY COMPATRIOTS By virtue of our constitutional rights, the People of Puerto Rico can now demand entry into the American Union as a federal "state". The legal procedure to follow without the intervention of Congress would be the following: meet in a constituent convention to draft the constitution of Puerto Rico, approve said constitution, elect the senators and representatives who should represent Puerto Rico in the American Congress, and demand our admission as a "state". Congress could not refuse. Our right within the Federal Constitution is indisputable. The federal "state" would be, however, suicide for Puerto Rico and a serious inconvenience for the United States. Then, it is of common interest to both parties that Puerto Rico be constituted as an international entity. The constitution for that purpose can now be drafted by a Puerto Rican constituent convention that the American Congress would have to recognize in principle because our right to have a government responsible only to us is indisputable. Our current legislature can facilitate the procedure by declaring itself a constituent convention when it meets in its next ordinary session. Of course, an ad hoc convention would be preferable. Duty requires us to study, deliberate, and immediately resolve our definitive status as a people. We can only do that ourselves, because we are the only ones who know our problems and the only ones with the duty to solve them. It is not honorable to transfer the responsibility to others. We must not delay the solution any longer if we do not want to irreparably harm our Homeland. This is a humble contribution to the preliminary study; may it continue, may the discussion come and may the resolution be immediate. THE AUTHOR LECTURE Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen: It is a privilege to take part in this celebration, Day of the Race, to celebrate the third anniversary of the founding of The Nationalist Association of Ponce and its District, and the anniversary of the discovery of America. This one is of universal significance but that one is not without transcendence, being fundamental in our collective life whose existence has international importance. The discovery of the New World was the experimental verification of a theory. The doubt regarding the spherical shape of our planet was replaced by the proven fact. Certainty resulted and mathematical deductions found demonstration in the new science of navigation. Above the man of the idea who kept him attached to the supposed terrestrial plane, he was seen traveling over the earth the infinite space and began to understand the wonderful intra-relation of the cosmos and mathematically formulated the most fundamental notions of time and space. Mathematics, terrestrial navigation, astronomy, that is, navigation in infinity, physics, chemistry, biology and psychology, which is the return of the mind to itself, have succeeded each other in rapid order and obedient to logic, since man is the microcosm. The certainty of the unity of the universe found a perfect parallel in the certainty of human unity, a truth, which despite being evident, many men do not consecrate themselves to. It fell in the providential order of things, that the ancestors of this people were the ones who gave the light to the world. In the logical order it could not be otherwise because the only civilization that exists in the West is Greco-Latin. Faithful to their mission, they were not satisfied with seeing clearly the terrestrial sphere, the beautiful unity of the universe and human unity and they consecrated themselves to this and with the indigenous race and the African race, they gathered humanity integrating it into the Race of which we are part, unique by constitution, to be a faithful interpreter of life and the ends of existence. The Anglo Saxons followed in the footsteps of our parents and settled in latitudes similar to those they inhabited. But they have not learned the human significance of the discovery, which is the discovery of humanity by itself and have exterminated the indigenous race, and remain separated from the African race, imported to exploit the conquered land, within a purism of race, false because it is contrary to human unity. They have betrayed the providential mission, and what they call a race problem is more fundamental, it is a problem of civilization, which is revealed by cultured men and peoples through harmonious coexistence with their fellow men. These two peoples are seen face to face across the border traced by the Rio Grande and the Antilles. Hence the importance of the founding of this Association that defends the integrity of our collective personality. We are at the vanguard, not defending it is betraying it and the ignominy of not having fulfilled our duty in history would fall on our succession. I have come, gentlemen, to present you with a juridical-political study of Joint Resolution No. 2, which our legislature has just approved. It has carried out patriotic work by unanimously approving said resolution, thus uniting the will of all the representative groups of public opinion. It is the first joint effort that is being made to definitively resolve the status of our collective personality, which is the basis of collective existence. Our fellow citizens will consecrate themselves to the solution of this, our most fundamental problem, however, to the detriment of the other activities of the intelligence. That is why the control of our economic life has passed into foreign or non-resident hands, and the reason that explains our stagnation or regression in the struggles of thought. The definitive status of Puerto Rico must be resolved by our constituent convention. To restore a Homeland, unanimous consensus is required and this is achieved only through the deliberation of a constituent congress representative of all the living forces of the country. Instead of meeting for the study and resolution of vital issues, our men have grown further apart each day due to the partisan struggle, which has made the common effort sterile during the last twenty-five years. The legality of the procedure is indisputable under the Foraker Act as well as under the Jones Act, because the right of the people to meet peacefully to demand a government worthy of itself and consistent with its legitimate aspirations is inalienable and is a principle that informs the American political institutions. It would then demonstrate capacity to govern ourselves and our conduct would deserve the respect of free men. It has been argued that by approving a bill by Congress and accepted by our people by virtue of a plebiscite, the ends pursued by a constituent congress would be achieved: a worthy government implemented with the consent of the governed. In the first place, the men who form the National Congress cannot comprehend our point of view even if a perfect knowledge of our history and our institutions were possible and second, the plebiscite is a matter of the influence of power and not of conscious consent. Then the need for the deliberation of a constituent convention is imposed. If there were someone so fearful in the exercise of his rights, to calm his conscience it could be required of the National Congress the approval of a law that provides the means so that our people can elect the delegates to the convention that drafts the constitution of Puerto Rico. The National Congress would never refuse to adopt a bill of that nature, because the procedure suggested emanates from the North American Constitution. In proof of this it is enough to remember the series of "enabling acts". Furthermore, the right to decide what the status of Puerto Rico should be lies exclusively with the people of Puerto Rico. This thesis was defended by the speaker in his interview with El Mundo on May 31 of this year. Although requesting the Congress and the President of the U.S. that they define their purpose regarding the definitive status of Puerto Rico, as provided by Joint Resolution No. 2, does not alter the right of our people to define their status, however, any concrete declaration by said powers would serve to stifle public opinion in our country that was contrary to what was stated by the aforementioned authorities, and that effect would be to the detriment of our right and subversive of American institutions. (a) American citizenship is not contrary to the complete sovereignty of Puerto Rico. (b) The American Constitution governs in Puerto Rico since the Treaty of Paris was signed. Joint Resolution No. 2 is in harmony with the formula that defines our collective status: Preserve the necessary relationship between Puerto Rico and the United States with the maximum of power in the People of Puerto Rico. Within it, all the solutions advocated so far fit, including independence. American citizenship makes the harmonious relationship between both peoples permanent and is not an obstacle to the complete sovereignty of Puerto Rico. The British Empire has just resolved the

conflict between the local sovereignty of its dominions with the necessary cohesion of the empire. The solution surprised the world, because it is founded on the recognition of local sovereignty despite British citizenship. Thus Canada, Australia, South Africa, Ireland, have become part of the League of Nations as equals among the free peoples of the world, by virtue of the most perfect recognition, which is that of the mother Homeland, England. This has postponed for some considerable time the feared disintegration of the empire, whose power and prestige is maintained today by means of the democratic principles of equality and voluntary cooperation. We must note that American citizenship was granted to the Puerto Ricans on the eve of an international crisis that could have endangered national existence and that therefore, it was necessary to establish the legal principle to demand the cooperation of our people, which had to be based on fellow citizens and equality. But the Jones Act, while ensuring in that way the solidarity between both peoples, left the people of Puerto Rico free to obtain its sovereignty and rejected incorporation. The policy drawn up in 1898 still governs. Let us explain. Many of our compatriots have spent twenty-five years requesting that the American Constitution be extended to Puerto Rico, not having realized that it was established in Puerto Rico since the Treaty of Paris was signed. The Spanish-American war, the conquest of Puerto Rico, and all acts of government carried out in Puerto Rico until now are constitutional acts and have been able to be carried out because they have been constitutional. The declaration of the American courts that the constitution does not follow the flag refers exclusively to the civil side of the constitution. War, conquest with all its consequences are constitutional acts, and it is because the famous instrument of government has two faces, one civil and the other military, as constitutional as one as the other. Internally, the President is the only power that determines when civil rights should be suspended, to establish a military regime that restores public safety. Externally, the President and Congress must concur to declare a state of war, with all its consequences, conquest, etc., between the nation and its enemies. In Puerto Rico, the military aspect of the Constitution governs until now. However, the state of war and its consequent conquest does not imply that the legal relationship between the parties has ceased, only that new rights and obligations arise between them. The absorption of a people without its consent is the greatest humiliation to which it can be subjected, but it is based on the fiction of international law that establishes the consent of the absorbed community. The military regime continues and the absorption has not been declared. Faithful to their constitution, the Americans have not been able to do anything other than respect our collective personality. The President governs in Puerto Rico in his capacity as a military man, head of the navy and the army, but subject to regulations established by Congress and accepted by him, to which have been given the sonorous name of organic charters. By virtue of these regulations, the President as he is responsible for the administration in Puerto Rico, has absolute control of it, and as he is obliged to maintain the statu quo, he has the absolute veto of all our bills. Of course, Congress has always retained the right to annul each and every one of our laws, approved by the President or his representative in Puerto Rico, the governor, which is the same. And as within any military regime, rights do not emanate from the governed, logically they lack final responsibility, and therefore, our courts lack definitive jurisdiction and hence the true supreme court of Puerto Rico is located in Boston and Washington. This system, like any military occupation, is harsh, but it maintains our separate personality, and in respect to it, incorporation has been denied. National policy has offered us the opportunity to define our collective aspirations freely, but apparently we have not realized this fact. The anomaly of asking Congress and the President for a definition of our status stands out, when that concerns us exclusively. But the national government has additional reasons not to deviate from its policy. Incorporation is a step towards the federal "state." For the first time, a community whose race, tradition, and institutions are fundamentally different from those that predominate in each "state" would become part of the federation. The Nation has been governed and is governed by the descendants of Anglo-Celts or Anglo-Saxons, who are the ones who have shaped it. No "state" has been admitted to the union unless these ethnic elements have acquired definitive ascendancy in it. In Puerto Rico this is impossible, due to our geographic isolation, the density of our population which cannot be substituted, the difference in race and language, because we possess a culture at least equal to that of our rulers, being direct heirs of the only civilization that exists in the West, and because our people tenaciously resist losing their historical personality. These would be inevitable consequences of statehood, because the "states" of the federation lack personality and sovereignty in the international sense. They possessed that during the Confederation and lost it within the federation upon adopting the current constitution. If
