---
layout: text
lang: en
title: Speaking with Albizu Campos
author: pedro-albizu-campos
author_name: Pedro Albizu Campos
date: 1927-01-01
source: Obras Escogidas 1923-1936 (Selected Works)
source_detail: "Pedro Albizu Campos, Obras Escogidas 1923-1936, Editorial Jelofe"
country: puerto-rico
permalink: /en/texts/pedro-albizu-campos/hablando-albizu-campos
spanish_version: /es/textos/pedro-albizu-campos/hablando-albizu-campos
collections:
  - independencia-puerto-rico
  - nacionalismo-puertorriqueno
  - relaciones-internacionales
---

Number 3. – Resolution. – La Prensa Latina is in solidarity with the legitimate aspirations of the Philippines and Puerto Rico to constitute themselves as free, sovereign, and independent Republics, in accordance with the principle and the free determination of nationalities and protests against the military occupation of these nations by forces of Estados Unidos. “Number 4. – Proposition. – Newspapers or publications edited in Latin Nations that are in reality branches of newspapers or publications of non-Latin nations shall not have the right to take part in the Congresses of La Prensa Latina. “Number 5. – Proposition. The Congress shall name a commission to formulate a system of exclusive world information for La Prensa Latina. “Number 6. – Resolution. – Seat shall not be given in the Congresses of La Prensa Latina to Latin publications that sustain anti-Latin propaganda within our nationalities.” ORGANIZATION OF THE COMMISSIONS “In the afternoon, with spirits calmed, the labors of the Congress were resumed. President Lugo Viña decreed a recess so that the four commissions could be organized, which will present opinions on the matters that correspond to them; opinions that will be considered in the plenary sessions. “All the delegates can form part of these commissions, with the sole condition that they register. The procedure is ample and plausible. The delegates were distributed in various rooms of the Asociación de Repórteres, seat of this complicated Babel, and proceeded to the election of the different directives of the commission. “These were constituted in the following manner: First commission. – In charge of promoting the constitution of a Latin Information Agency. “President: Benjamín Cohen; Vice-president: Marius Appelins and Juan A. Dennis; Secretary: Osvaldo Valdés de la Paz; Second Secretary: Paul Odet. “Second commission. – University Exchange. “President: Antonio Iraizoz; Vice-president: Irene de Vasconcelos and Tomé Reis; Secretary: H. Brunimon. “Third commission. – Statutes for professional journalists. “President: M. Bóugeon; Vice-president: Manuel Bedoya and Félix F. Palavincini; Secretary: Juan Sánchez Azcona. “The fourth commission could not be integrated. INTERESTING DEBATE IN THE FIRST COMMISSION “As soon as the first commission was constituted, its President Mr. Cohen reads the following motion, which tends to strengthen the freedom of the press, whose rights, legitimately consecrated by the entire world, are, however, violated at every step in almost all latitudes. TO THE CONGRESS "We, the undersigned, Delegates to the present Congress, have the honor of submitting to your elevated consideration, the following MOTION "Evidently, the true functional transcendence of the act we are attending cannot be limited to making agreements of an adjective and ornamental character, but the congressmen can advance to the medullary significance of each problem to be considered; it also being evident that in the current moments the universal press demands true definitions on the scope and limitations of its social activities, the freedom "de jure" and "de facto" of those who exercise such a high ministry is unavoidable and immanent to the existence of the journalist function, in order to fulfill correctly and serenely the ends and duties that their own function imposes on them, it is necessary before anything else to establish solid guarantees for these freedoms and to clearly define the constitutive factors of such freedoms. "In virtue of such reasons, we propose: "First: That the VII Congress of La Prensa Latina considers freedom co-existent with the function of the universal press. "Second: That the VII Congress of La Prensa Latina, by virtue of the previous declaration, addresses the governments of the countries represented in this Congress, requesting the declaration of the scope and limitations of written thought in relation to the journalistic function. "Third: That the VII Congress of La Prensa Latina agrees and requests its adoption by the expressed governments of the guarantee measures that protect "de facto" the freedom that "de jure" is granted to the press. "Fourth: That a "Permanent Commission" be created, integrated by five members of this own organism, that represents and asserts the written rights of the Latin press in cases of claim of sufficient probative value, using the solidarity means that are within its reach, and that they are obligated to provide if the principle of cooperation that informs this Congress is to have a practical and concrete reality." Habana, marzo 8 de 1928 R. Gárate, (Numerous delegates also sign). EVEN FREEDOM OF THE PRESS IS CAUSE FOR FEARS "When this motion is put to discussion, in general, the doubt arises as to whether it will be within the faculties of the Congress, and therefore of the Commission, to address this question, since the measures that are proposed can be considered as political matter... Even freedom of the press causes fears to the distinguished tourists! "A new discussion is provoked, but as we are in family, it does not acquire the proportions of the morning. Particularly the European delegates, like Mr. Appelius, Italian - fear causing displeasure to the governments, confessing that it is not possible to go very far since the congresses always take place under the auspices of some government... Ah vaya! -exclaims a delegate not very fond of intervening in the discussions. "Sierra, Cohen, Roselló and Albizu, who is always energetic even against the Presidency, take part in the debate. There is frequent talk of the statutes, and the question arises again: what part of the statutes or what statutes prohibit addressing these political questions? "At this point, the miraculous Mr. Waleffe arrives, a walking archive of the Congresses of La Prensa Latina, interpreter of the statutes and pythoness of the gods. "Mr. Waleffe explains that the prohibition of dealing with political matters includes those cases in which it would not be possible for there to be an agreement between all Latin journalists, and gives as an example, the interest that Colombian journalists have in the Panama Canal... A delegate from Colombia tells us in our ear: "look, this good sir has not yet realized that Panamá has not been an integral part of Colombia for many years..." And another declares to us: "I'm leaving, this is a vagrancy...". "Finally the motion is voted on, agreeing that it be passed to study. AGAIN THE INTERVENTIONIST QUESTION "President Lugo Viña had turned over to the first Commission the motion that was not read in the morning, against interventions. Mr. Cohen is going to read it. It begins: "The VII Congress..." energetically protests against the interventions of Estados Unidos..." And Mr. Appelius cannot contain himself. "No! It should not continue to be read. We are prohibited from touching political matters" -he exclaims-. Albizu Campos is indignant, saying that it is not possible to restrict even the freedom to propose, which all the delegates have; our technical Director, Arturo Alfonso Roselló, as well as other Cuban delegates support Albizu, and President Cohen himself, contrary to the approval of the motion, believes that however, it should be read. "Then another prior motion is presented, tending to not take into account the proposed resolutions, although, naturally, they have to be read. "The first two resolutions, which we published earlier, are read and voted on separately. And even delegates who had formed the celebrated motion, vote that they not be taken into account. "Voting in favor, only: Albizu Campos, Arturo Alfonzo Roselló, Osvaldo Valdés de la Paz, Juan Antiga, Ramón de Franche and Raúl Gárate... (It is convenient to warn that many delegates are missing, among them the majority of the South Americans, the Central Americans and the Mejicanos). THE APOLOGIES "After the vote, the natural apologies are produced. Everyone is anti-interventionist; but... "Mr. Francisco Javier Sierra says that only basically journalistic questions should be treated. Mr. Pardo Suárez signed the motion; but now, although he is against intervention, he believes that the statutes prevent the Congress from touching political matters. "Mr. Cohen says that both the newspaper he represents -"Mercurio" of Santiago- and he, are against intervention; but he does not believe that anything more than technical questions should be treated.... "Mr. Carricarte also opines that only technical questions should be treated, and recalls that he has been an enemy of intervention in difficult moments. THE REASONS OF THE Pro Valdés de la Paz declares that if Latinidad does not come to us, interpreting the yearnings and longings of the American peoples, Latinidad does not respond to its historical duties. "Roselló says that the great problems that affect the Latin peoples should be addressed, seeking the common good and disregarding individual situations. "De Franche declares that he does not agree with the way in which the resolutions are presented, but since what it was about was to give them entry, he voted in favor, since it is not a congress of technicians or doctrinaires, so political questions cannot be naturally detached. The great organ of opinion that "La Prensa" of Buenos Aires represents in constant campaigns has systematically opposed interventions, so he has to be consistent with his criteria, with that of his newspaper and with that of his director. "And tomorrow the other chapters of the proposition will continue to be rejected so that there is no doubt about the uselessness of the Congress". -Tell me Albizu something of your impressions of those countries you visited. -"That is something difficult because it is necessary to specify. For example, I observed in Santo Domingo that there is a formed awareness of national unity and a heroic spirit to defend the rights of the nationality. This feeling is generalized in all the Antilles, which no longer see in the Yankee a superior being. And the Antilles are not only a moral vanguard. The moral battle is won; the material one remains to be won. Perú is the only country where the superstition that reigned in Puerto Rico at the beginning of the century that the man from the north is a superior creature still persists. There the head of government has stated that the Yankee intervention in Nicaragua and Haití is part of a "civilizing work" initiated by Estados Unidos. The Yankophile elements of these countries are very similar to those of Puerto Rico. "There is a continental concern throughout América regarding the Yankee influence. Of course, the attitude is one of opposition, except for Perú. The reception that my conferences had was sincere and favorable, especially in the Antilles it was a reception of the heart, since in this littoral of América the threat from the North is more dangerous". The interlocutor tells me a historical fact but forgets a name. "Listen Laura, what was the name of Napoleón's brother-in-law who came to Haití in order to capture Toussaint L'Ouverture?" "Leclerc", responded a feminine little voice from the room. I thought that in that hogar it was necessary to interview two people, since Mrs. Albizu is a doctor in sciences graduated from the Universidad de Harvard. Shortly after a tiny little woman appeared, but who revealed in her eyes a great liveliness and intellectual curiosity. She shares with him his same concerns and anxieties and made of his same wood has accompanied him on his patriotic pilgrimage. We resumed the conversation. -How do those countries see the status of Puerto Rico? -"The problem of Puerto Rico is such an obvious question that it is not discussed. It is up to us to present in a courageous and collective manner the matter of our political status. -Do you believe in the virtuality of the Pan-Americanist movement? -"The Pan-American Union is a forum where Puerto Rico can present the case of its independence. But Pan-Americanism does not exist either in an economic or political sense. That is a forced meeting of the nations of the new world". -Do you believe in the possibility of a new culture in América? -"In the spirit of all cultures there are eternal and universal values such as the appreciation of wisdom and beauty as well as the refinement of the spirit. These values are not the patrimony of any nation in particular and therefore transcend all ages. This does not mean that América cannot adopt new modalities to culture since there are innumerable historical, racial, geographical and social factors that conspire in its favor. Nor do I believe that América can or should absolutely break its intellectual ties with Europe since from the language to our institutional system has come from there; in addition for those eternal values to which I referred a moment ago". -Does the North American influence progress in South América? -"Unfortunately it progresses, but on the other hand there is a great struggle to stop the thrust of the North". -What turn do you believe nationalism will take in relation to the current political moment? -It depends on what those parties do. If they limit themselves as they have done until now to fighting for colonial perks and carrying the ideal only on their lips to surprise the unwary multitudes, they will end up collapsing. "The country requires a new policy. It is not enough to repeat the programs postulated by the Unión de Puerto Rico in 1904 and 1913, which is what the Alianza Portorriqueña and the new Unión de Puerto Rico have been limited to. "The critical situation through which the country is going demands a new policy in the face of the invading power. It is necessary to start by not cooperating with the current empire. The impressions I have collected to date lead me to the conclusion that none of those parties cited will do anything. They will limit themselves to fighting as always for colonial positions. I would be happy if the facts forced me to rectify. And I above all ask for facts from men who speak of independence without feeling faith or having sacrificed anything for it. I am sure that we are in the hour of disenchantment that will be complete after the next elections. "Organized nationalism must maintain its personality without affiliation with any other party. The actions of the current parties that postulate independence do not justify the dissolution of the Partido Nacionalista de Puerto Rico. It is pleasing to every nationalist that the adversaries of yesterday have given him the reason and want to fraternize and attract the group that in 1924 did not allow the declaration of independence to disappear from the political programs of Puerto Rico". -What opinion do you have of the educational system of Puerto Rico? -"It is neither the classical system nor the vocational system. It pretends to be eclectic and does not meet the needs of an instruction that enables the student to enjoy economic independence upon leaving the classrooms. "Nor does it prepare him to carry out a work of importance in the development of the alta cultura of the country, and as a consequence creates a con gremio of presumed intellectuals who venture to opine with the greatest cold blood on all the topics however transcendental they may be. "All teaching should be in the vernacular language. Not only for the reason of its conservation, since at present its literary and scientific value is indisputable and incomparable, but also because the first notions, considering our ethnic and cultural constitution, we receive them in Spanish and the total comprehension of the same, when they are raised in the literary, scientific or artistic field, is only possible in the own language. The learning of other classical or modern languages is forced both from the cultural and utilitarian point of view". -Should the Universidad propel or abandon the supposed ideal of a Pan-American Universidad? -"A Universidad is a Universidad and nothing more, without absurd limitations that restrict its universal mission. That of Pan-Americanism is to tie an appendix of political propaganda to the Universidad, harmful to Puerto Rico and to the entire continent. Puerto Rico must have a university center of the first order, but a true university center". -Do you believe that the Partido Socialista is justified with a purely economic program without occupying itself with the political? -"The Partido Socialista as it is constituted today, without any political declaration, inculcating in the masses that the only protection with which it counts for the vindication of its social and economic rights depends on the presence of the flag of Estados Unidos in Puerto Rico, is in reality the party that with more vigor defends colonialism. "In a colonia a party without a political purpose is not justified. The Partido Socialista beforehand sanctions the statu quo. "Strange irony that the party that pretends to defend the masses from capitalist exploitation is the most ardent defender of the regime that sustains and foments that same exploitation". -Do you believe that two parties that postulate in their programs independence and statehood as the definitive solutions of our political status would be harmonizable? -"Only from the economic point of view. One cannot postulate a "state" of the North American Union or a free and sovereign nation with a mass of peones. For the "state" solution or the independence solution it is required that all the wealth that exists in Puerto Rico belongs to portorriqueños bona fide. "The so-called Partido Republicano de Puerto Rico committed the gravest error by alienating through the executive council to the invading interests all the sources of wealth: communication routes, franchises, etc., with the vain hope that with that suicidal policy it was going to ingratiate itself with the North American powers and make viable in that way the creation of a North American state in Puerto Rico, when, in reality, what it was doing was destroying all possibility for the creation of such a state because that policy has led to the displacement of the portorriqueño by the North American converting Puerto Rico from a sovereign country in the economic as it was in 1898 in a colonia of peones belonging to a North American factory in 1930. "The Unión de Puerto Rico acting with a pseudo-nationalist program, also fell into the illusion that the import of North American capital was necessary and cooperated effectively with its most bitter adversaries, the "republicans", in the work of displacing the portorriqueño. "That disorientation is the basic cause of the economic and social ills that overwhelm us. "It is necessary to repeat it always and at every moment: that the lands, the communication routes, the maritime fronts and everything that represents real wealth in Puerto Rico must belong to portorriqueños bona fide. The state and independence are impossible without this condition sine qua non". What do you opine about Mr. Roosevelt's rehabilitating plan? "It demonstrates that for Puerto Rico, in Estados Unidos there is not even charity because in Estados Unidos large sums of money are raised with great ease for charitable purposes. But that does not apply to Puerto Rico, which is a pueblo despoiled of its wealth by Estados Unidos and whose misery the government and the citizens of Estados Unidos are solely responsible for. And there is no justice, because the basic cause of our misery is the displacement of the portorriqueño landowner by the North American due to the political system prevailing in Puerto Rico. According to this system all the powers in Puerto Rico are direct mandatories of the government of Estados Unidos and do in our country what they are ordered from Washington. "That displacement could have been avoided by the nation that retained in its hands all the powers. "The portorriqueños will not be able to vindicate their public wealth within the current regime, unless they are willing to place themselves in a position of open rebellion against that regime. "It can be assured that the government of Estados Unidos will do nothing to diminish the economic burden that weighs on the country, and in reality it is pleased about it because that accelerates the displacement plan to leave us in the air in our own land. "Sagacious North Americans saw clearly that the cyclone of San Ciriaco of 1899 that ruined the entire country, accelerated the economic penetration of Estados Unidos in Puerto Rico for a time conservatively estimated at 25 years. "The invaders were able to buy very valuable lands at ridiculous prices compared to their true value. "After the last cyclone of San Felipe let us prepare to see the disappearance of a large number of the few portorriqueño landowners that we have left, and whose lands will forcibly pass to North American interests. "The hour of liquidation is rapidly approaching us. The insular and municipal public treasury cannot attend to its normal demands. It is impossible for it to address a crisis like the present one. The revenues are used in the payment of the interests and the amortization of the North American loans. Will Estados Unidos authorize a loan with a reasonable type of interest to amortize the current public debt? "It will not do so nor will its bankers because here its policy of economic penetration has triumphed. That is only done in independent countries where it is necessary to carry out that same policy and where the loan is the most effective means of penetration. "In 1898, Estados Unidos, proclaiming supposed humanitarian sentiments, detained all the powers of Puerto Rico. That rehabilitation plan is a confession of its despoilment". -Is there any possibility for the ideal of independence? -The nationalist ideal is no longer a spiritual aspiration. It is the only weapon that the pueblo of Puerto Rico has left to vindicate its most material interests. "Only a party founded and oriented towards the independence of the country as the only and immediate solution can stop our complete displacement by the invaders and enable us to bring back into our hands the patria wealth that the North Americans currently possess. "If the country does not continue playing at independence as the Unión de Puerto Rico has been doing until now, and adopts an energetic policy of valor and sacrifice it will achieve much. "It is necessary to bravely raise our relations with Estados Unidos with the brave and decisive attitude that the case requires. "And I can assure that that policy would have the unconditional support of almost all the nations of Hispano-América. And that moral support is of an incalculable power". -Tell me Albizu, you who have been formed and educated under the Yankee system, why is your political ideology so anti-American? -"Because no one knows evil better than he who has lived it". You will have seen reader, in the course of this interview the frankness that Albizu Campos puts in his words. He speaks like a whole Hombre, with a capital H. And this fighter who has dreamed, suffered and fought with heroic impetus for the sovereignty of his country returns to Puerto Rico, silently, after two and a half years of quixotic pilgrimage, when others with less accomplishments have launched clamorous campaign peals. Manuel RIVERA MATOS Pedro Albizu Campos upon returning to Puerto Rico after his propaganda trip through Latin América. 1930. "HERE IT WILL BE ELUCIDATED WHAT ARE THE PLANS AND ATTITUDE OF ESTADOS UNIDOS TOWARDS THE PUEBLOS OF OUR RAZA", SAID ALBIZU CAMPOS AT THE BANQUET IN HIS HONOR On Saturday, at nine o'clock at night, the banquet in honor of Lcdo. Pedro Albizu Campos organized by several friends and sympathizers of the nationalist leader, in the "Hotel Palace" took place. Around fifty diners of all affiliations and some coming from various poblaciones of the island such as Ponce, Fajardo, Naguabo and Manatí, gathered around the table presided over by the honoree, Mr. Albizu Campos, Mr. Lope Bello, Mr. José P. Berríos and the Director de Brindis, Mr. Luis Antonio Miranda. The back wall was adorned with the portorriqueña flag. After a sumptuous menu, the act began. The Director de Brindis delivered a brief speech talking about Mr. Albizu's nationalist campaign through Latin América and immediately announced Mr. Lope Bello. Mr. Lope Bello's speech was one of the happiest that we have heard from the distinguished Venezuelan. He made reference to the fact that the portorriqueños had never been so united in ideals and yet they were divided in their public actions. He cited a phrase from Washington that justified the attitude of Puerto Rico to claim its political rights. His words were warmly applauded. The Director de Brindis read several adhesions from Dr. Ramón Lavandero, from Lcdo. Fulgencio Piñeiro, from Lcdo. Samuel R. Quiñones and other telegrams from the island. Then Lcdo. José S.

Joy, don Epifanio Fernández Vanga, who read a quatrain, Lcdo. R. Sancho Bonet, Lcdo. Rafael Díaz Cintrón, Mr. Arturo Gallardo, Manuel Rivera Matos, Fernando Sierra, Ortiz Lecodet, Lcdo. Cruz Horta, Mr. Modesto Gotay, Mr. Alberto Núñez, and the young Gilberto Concepción, from the Universidad de Puerto Rico. Upon the announcement of Mr. Albizu, the audience rose to its feet and paid him a prolonged applause. The honoree delivered an eloquent speech for a space of two and a half hours, analyzing in lavish detail the internal situation of the United States, the problems of Puerto Rico, and the dangers that threaten Latin America. Mr. Albizu began by saying that this act filled him with satisfaction and that for another man it would be a cause of pride and vanity. "But it is the duty of all those who possess a grain of wisdom to put it at the service of their fellow men because it does not belong to us but is a patrimony of Providence. Moreover, we are facing the Homeland's tragedy to dwell on personal minutiae." He then went into a detailed analysis of the situation in South America, saying that this continent was the object of universal greed. The invaders sought to exercise a hegemony over all cultural and then commercial values. First, they try to attract the intellectual element and then the people. For this work of conquest, they rely on a series of institutions, many of them of perverse charity, with which they intend to dazzle the invaded peoples. "Puerto Rico is the most integrated nationality of the continent in the ethnic and cultural sense, we have the most homogeneous, noble, and intelligent mass of America. But we also have the most rotten directing class of the entire continent. "Our island condition is a postulate of independence because Nature per se has already made us free. Islands have always been in history the most indomitable territories and we have the example in ourselves that despite thirty years of Yankee colonialism we preserve our personality intact despite the fact that our political sovereignty has not been recognized. "Our weakness lies in not capitalizing on that unitary force resulting from our ethnic and cultural bond. We go from embraces to separations and from fraternal understandings to fratricidal hostility. My wife has had a phrase to judge this situation: (the audience rose to its feet) "We play at divisions when we are indivisible." He then made an analysis "of the imperialist system that has a few institutions with disguised purposes to surprise the good faith of the peoples who fall under its influence." "The United States today has a complete record of all the oil and mining territories of South America. And behind the Red Cross or the Rockefeller Foundation goes the company requesting some concession from the Government. Why doesn't the Rockefeller Foundation exercise its charity in Nueva York, where there are four million beings who live in the most deplorable conditions of misery? It goes to Latin America because in the continent there are rich oil zones." Referring to the situation in Puerto Rico he said: "I have lamented the fall of the Coalitionist President of the Chamber. It was a proper opportunity for him to confront the Power and be whipped in the face from La Fortaleza. The United States wants to surrender the island intelligentsia. Many young people due to the impoverishment of the country have to betray themselves and take refuge in the shadow of the budget so as not to starve to death. It is necessary at all costs to avoid this forced demoralization of youth." To the university students he addressed the following message: "The young people who are currently studying at the Universidad should not do active politics, they need their energies for study. Of course, they must have a patriotic feeling, but now, they should not be distracted, Their duty is to prepare themselves, to become competent so that later they can defend their country with the powerful weapons of knowledge. The young man who could be a brilliant student and is mediocre is not a good patriot." "There is not in the American Union a state comparable to us in ethnic homogeneity, in culture, and with a history so rich in luminous pages. We abolished slavery without shedding a drop of blood, we gave illustrious soldiers like Valero and Rius Rivera to the cause of the independence of America. We have contributed sentimental values to Hispanic-American culture, Morell Campos was born in our land, who was the first musician of America. We gave Doctor Stahl, one of the most notable botanical sages of the continent. Fortunately, the personality created by these men of culture has not disappeared and this is a barrier that defends us against the conquest plans of the invader. Puerto Rico presents the most beautiful case in America, because here in the waters of the Caribbean it will be elucidated what are the plans and the attitude of the United States towards the peoples of our race. "Puerto Rico could use the Pan American Union and the League of Nations as forums to claim its right to be a free people. The Resident Commissioner should not accept his position and should remain in Puerto Rico. What do we want a deaf-mute representative for? This would be an effective way to create a difficult situation for the United States and to draw the attention of the world to the case of Puerto Rico. Then we would present our problem in the field of international relations, which is where we must present our case. "The problem of our independence depends on our will. The present generation has a grave historical responsibility to fulfill either to prolong the colony or to adopt a gesture of worthy men. Above all, we must defend our personality because we are the most defined nationality of America." A prolonged ovation was paid at the end of his speech. The honoree received multiple congratulations and embraces after his resounding speech. The act ended at two thirty in the morning. By M. RIVERA MATOS adhering to the opinion of the Mexican Gamboa, who affirms that "the conquest of America was carried out by the Indians and the work of independence was carried out by the Spaniards." Cortés, for example, attracted the discontented Indians and with them was able to overthrow the power of Moctezuma. The same phenomenon occurred in various places on the continent. During and after the conquest, the process of miscegenation begins in Mexico. There are two causes that accelerated this process: The difficulty of transportation and Catholicism, which ordered respect for women and the recognition of children in whatever way they were born. That is how the English conqueror differed from the Spanish one. The Englishman became a hunter of the Indian without the slightest respect for women or the offspring he engendered. After the Revolution promoted and led by direct descendants of Spaniards came the republic and with it the establishment of social hierarchies. The pressure of the mestizo element against the mestizo and the pressure of the mestizo against the indigenous prevailed in Mexico. In this formative process of nationality, all the collective leaders Juárez, Porfirio Díaz, Francisco 1. Madero were mestizos or of pure indigenous blood. The revolutions were fomented by foreign countries but also by the internal exploitation that weighed on the indigenous people despite the fact that all the directors had blood of the primitive autochthonous race. In 1912, the United States intervened in Mexico. Five nations of Europe including España protested this intervention. But the war came and Europe became unconcerned about the case of Mexico. The United States was forging a plan to disintegrate the Mexican nationality with a hostile propaganda aimed at putting all the ethnic elements of the nation in conflict. After the war, Wilson asked in the Treaty of Versalles that Mexico not be invited to the League of Nations. Since then Mexico has not wanted to join the Tribunal de la Haya, despite its repeated invitations. From all this ethnic chaos has emerged a moral value: the awareness of its origins and the pride of indigenous blood. The nationality is today morally constituted by the integration of all its racial elements and therefore it is physically constituted. From this fusion of the European invader with the autochthonous race has emerged in Mexico its own art and even a distinct vision of life. Mexican art is the most original and new that exists throughout the continent. Finally, the speaker announced that in this drama of the two cultures that dispute the hegemony of the western hemisphere, Mexico, due to the integration of its ethnic elements and its national consciousness, is an advanced position, a fortress, that guards the treasure of our culture and our race. "THE SUPPORTERS OF STATEHOOD DO NOT DARE TO ASK FOR IT BECAUSE THEY KNOW THAT THEY WOULD BE HIT IN THE HEAD WITH THE COLUMNS OF THE CAPITOL," SAID ALBIZU CAMPOS The conference of Lcdo. Pedro Albizu Campos on "The Political Status of Puerto Rico" delivered at the Universidad under the auspices of the "Cultural Society" of the Colegio de Leyes culminated in a splendid civic cultural act. All the armchairs and hallways of the Salón de Actos were completely full with a select audience of students, politicians, and intellectuals. Among the attendees were don Antonio R. Barceló, Dr. Massó, acting Chancellor of the Universidad; don Eduardo Giorgetti, Dr. Gili Gaya, visiting professor at our Universidad, Lcdo. José A. Balseiro, Dr. Ramón Lavandero, Dr. Gómez Brioso and other distinguished personalities of our capital. The speaker was warmly applauded upon presenting himself to the auditorium. When considering the problem of our political "status" three factors must be considered: Our opinion, the opinion of the United States, and international opinion. Puerto Rico has the current condition of a territory of the United States. "And I deny that our country is a territory of any power." Albizu Campos then made a detailed historical analysis to prove that the term state is inapplicable to the current units that make up the North American Union since when the Confederation was forged the states lost their full and absolute sovereignty that they had in the primitive alliance of colonies that was formed after independence. Many of the original rights were delegated to the federal power. Today the sovereign is the people of the United States and not the people of a state in particular. After the North American nationality was formed with the thirteen primitive colonies, the need arose to populate the immense territory that extended west of the Alleghany mountains. With this new situation, the federal government instituted territorial government. A governor was designated who organized a legislature and a judicial system, until that territory had sufficient population to constitute itself as a State of the Union. The governor had omnimodous powers; it was a personalistic regime without responsibility to the governed. This is the principle that informs all the territorial legislation of the United States. Many of those states were incorporated into the Union with a population lower than that of San Juan or Río Piedras today.
