---
layout: text
lang: en
title: Albizu Campos Responds to Barceló's Idea for a New Plan for the "Puerto Rican Alliance
author: pedro-albizu-campos
author_name: Pedro Albizu Campos
date: 1924-01-01
source: Obras Escogidas 1923-1936 (Selected Works)
source_detail: "Pedro Albizu Campos, Obras Escogidas 1923-1936, Volume 1"
country: puerto-rico
permalink: /en/texts/pedro-albizu-campos/ledo-albizu-campos-responde-idea-sr-barcelo-someter
spanish_version: /es/textos/pedro-albizu-campos/ledo-albizu-campos-responde-idea-sr-barcelo-someter
collections:
  - nacionalismo-puertorriqueno
  - independencia-puerto-rico
---

its enemies. In Puerto Rico, the military aspect of the Constitution prevails until now. However, the state of war and its consequent conquest do not imply that the legal relationship between the parties has ceased, only that new rights and obligations arise between them. The absorption of a people without their consent is the greatest humiliation to which they can be subjected, but it is based on the fiction of international law that establishes the consent of the absorbed community. The military regime continues and the absorption has not been declared. Faithful to their constitution, the Americans have been unable to do anything other than respect our collective personality. The President governs in Puerto Rico in his capacity as a military man, head of the navy and the army, but subject to regulations established by the Congress and accepted by him, which have been given the sonorous name of organic charters. By virtue of these regulations, the President, as he is responsible for the administration in Puerto Rico, has absolute control of it, and as he is obliged to maintain the *status quo*, he has the absolute veto of all our bills. Of course, the Congress has always retained the right to annul each and every one of our laws, approved by the President or his representative in Puerto Rico, the governor, which is the same thing. And since within any military regime, rights do not emanate from the governed, logically they lack final responsibility, and therefore, our courts lack definitive jurisdiction and hence the true supreme court of Puerto Rico is located in Boston and Washington. This system, like all military occupation, is harsh, but it maintains our separate personality, and in respect for it, incorporation has been denied. National politics has offered us the opportunity to define our collective aspirations freely, but apparently we have not realized this fact. The anomaly of asking the Congress and the President for a definition of our status stands out, when that concerns us exclusively. But the national government has additional reasons not to deviate from its policy. Incorporation is a step to the federal "state". For the first time, a community whose race, tradition, and institutions are fundamentally different from those that predominate in each "state" would become part of the federation. The Nation has been governed and is governed by the descendants of Anglo-Celts or Anglo-Saxons, who are the ones who have shaped it. No "state" has been admitted to the union unless these ethnic elements have acquired definitive ascendancy in it. In Puerto Rico that is impossible, due to our geographical isolation, due to the density of our population which cannot be substituted, due to the difference in race and language, because we possess a culture at least equal to that of our rulers, being direct heirs of the only civilization that exists in the West, and because our people tenaciously resist losing their historical personality. Those would be inevitable consequences of statehood, because the "states" of the federation lack personality and sovereignty in the international sense. They possessed that during the Confederation and lost it within the federation when adopting the current constitution. If there was ever any doubt regarding these extremes, it was dispelled with the results of the civil war (1861-1865). In the nation there is a sovereign, United States, and a personality, the American. Furthermore, the Nation's expansion policy is towards the South. Its international relations with Canada have been based on equality and cooperation, but with the nations south of the Río Grande, it has been based on penetration and conquest. That policy is directed against our brother peoples in race, in culture, and of common history. No one can expect Puerto Rican senators to sanction the acts carried out in Mexico, Cuba, Haiti, Santo Domingo, Central America. In the National Senate we would be an obstacle, American statehooders see that clearly. That is why they have turned a deaf ear to the petition for federal "statehood". To grant it would be to destroy the homogeneity of the ruling elements, the basis of their expansion and their imperial greatness. The agrarian question can be resolved now. The rights of our people to have an elective governor and complete autonomy to legislate on local matters are obvious. Joint Resolution No. 2, requests them in terms for clear interpretation. The request for the right to legislate on the important problem of the agrarian question seems unnecessary to us. We have sufficient powers for it. Legislation on that extreme would have served and will serve as a touchstone to determine the intention of the current regime. The extension of Federal legislation to Puerto Rico is a setback. Asking for the extension of federal legislation to Puerto Rico is a step backwards, no matter how beneficial said legislation may seem. It is a demonstration of inability to solve our problems, although it is evident that those expenses for Puerto Rico, come from here due to the exclusive right that American commerce enjoys in our country, by virtue of the tariff. Need for judicial unity. (a) A supreme court must be constituted. The Federal Court for Puerto Rico is unnecessary. Legislative unity and executive unity are required in the Resolution by placing federal appointments in the hands of the elective governor, but judicial unity is omitted. A true supreme court must be created, appointed by the elective governor of Puerto Rico with the consent of our senate, instead of the intermediate court of appeals that bears that name today, with jurisdiction to definitively resolve all legal questions, except those that involve the interpretation of the Constitution and public international law. This limitation is imposed by the necessary uniformity of interpretation, which the Supreme Court of the United States must make while the Nation is sovereign in Puerto Rico, and therefore responsible to the world in everything that affects the rights of other nations. The constitution of a supreme court is essential for the following reasons: In the most important cases, the threat of an appeal to Boston by the party that has the means is enough so that the other party that lacks them has to agree in order not to sustain a litigation on appeal before the Circuit Court or before the Supreme Court of the United States; furthermore, the fact that the courts that can resolve definitively are located in the United States, has forced the system of decisions to be based more on precedents than on principles, which is the Anglo-American system, from which the great continental and English jurists are fighting to free their respective countries. For Puerto Rico this constitutes a costly legal setback for the science of law. Since all our courts are federal if we attend to the source of their jurisdiction, the Federal Court of Puerto Rico is unnecessary. A dual jurisdiction is currently maintained to the detriment of collective interests due to the complication it brings in the administration of justice. Furthermore, this court naturally follows as law the precedents of the federal courts of the continent, when it is resolving situations created in Puerto Rico, and although it adopts as law the precedents of the current supreme court, of Puerto Rico in cases that involve the interpretation of our local laws, but since by necessity this has adopted the system of decision by precedents, largely taken from the continental courts with a legal system different from ours, the damage that has been done to the science of law in Puerto Rico can be seen, when Anglo-American jurists are fighting to abolish the system of precedents that has diluted and confused the principles and want to adopt the European continental system of interpretation, which was ours, we are trying to adopt the Anglo-American system. Legislation prohibiting courts from following precedents as law is necessary. I invite you, gentlemen, to the serene study of our fundamental problems. To solve them, the cooperation of intelligent men and women is required, gathered in an environment that inspires responsibility for what is said. Let us not forget that the cohesion of regional forces is essential to constitute a Homeland. PEDRO ALBIZU CAMPOS Ponce, Puerto Rico, Día de la Raza, October 12, 1923. INTERVIEW WITH LCDO. PEDRO ALBIZU CAMPOS 4 The manifesto of Mr. Barceló and Tous Soto is impressive, and for that reason requires a cold and equitable analysis. The proposition of reaching a definitive understanding on the political basis on which the country's politics should revolve is a cause for satisfaction for the country. If it is self-government, as stated in the Manifesto, it will surely be welcomed among all the liberal elements of Puerto Rico. A government responsible only to us is imposed. This is a truth that we have been discussing for some time, but an agreement had not yet been reached among people with sufficient authority in the electorate. It seems incredible that until now there has not been that unanimous consensus. The greatest obstacle until now to reaching that extreme was the policy of intransigent unconditionalism of the Republican party which, advocating for statehood, refused to preach to its people to demand the rights it has to govern itself. This policy accused a lack of understanding of what statehood is, which is only government by and with the consent of the governed. And although statehood limited the personality of our country in extremes essential for its existence as a defined people in the civilized world, it required, in order to reach that, that our people get used to exercising all the rights in Puerto Rico. The idea of statehood has been relegated to the remote and inconceivable, clear and definitive have been the official declarations such as those of Mr. Tous Soto. Within the proposed program, the complete development of our political personality is not limited in any way, and within it we can reach complete sovereignty, to which we have an indisputable right. The declarations regarding the preservation of our language, our culture, our material interests, and our distinctive civilization are not empty. Mr. Tous Soto has made a great sacrifice to reach this conviction which he frankly and honestly puts before his compatriots, unconcerned about the personal results, favorable or unfavorable for him. We admire the patriotic gesture. We must distinguish the indisputable constitution of the country from the means to realize what that constitution determines. I understand that our future constitution establishes a government responsible to us in certain important extremes. To develop the aspirations that this Constitution entails, the depreciation of any of the existing parties is not required. And this would be convenient because then there could be greater harmony among all. It seems clear to me that the proposition of Mr. Tous Soto and Barceló that the Unionist and Republican Parties reach a partisan understanding between themselves, or dissolve to constitute a new party, is not feasible and is out of place in Puerto Rico. I fear that Mr. Tous Soto is alone within his party on that important extreme. His Party and the Socialist Party, having been allies of adversity until now, feel an affinity between themselves of such a nature that it distances them as a group from the Unionist Party. The immediate effect of the declarations made in the Manifesto will be to precipitate the General Ligao between the Republicans and Socialists, despite the official hostility with which the coalition would encounter. There is no doubt that in the United States there is currently no room for tolerance towards socialist parties or coalitions with socialist parties. The unionist party is then presented with a situation that requires immense internal organization to prepare for the electoral struggle that will be extremely passionate. The moment is one of expectation, especially for the socialists who have been disauthorized as a political party in the manifesto. This has been a cause of protests among all socialists. We sincerely believe that it would have had a better effect to invite them as well to a general understanding since they are a party constituted in Puerto Rico representing living forces in the country. Our duty is clear, whatever the result of the assemblies held by the militant parties, we will be within the liberals defending each and every one of the rights of our people to enjoy their entire civilization without restrictions that arise from their will. PEDRO ALBIZU CAMPOS EL LCDO. ALBIZU CAMPOS RESPONDING TO MR. BARCELO'S IDEA SUBMITS TO THE CONSIDERATION OF THE COUNTRY A NEW PLAN FOR THE FORMATION OF THE PUERTO RICAN ALLIANCE Ponce, Puerto Rico April 24, 1924 Hon. Antonio R. Barceló, President of the Senate San Juan, Puerto Rico Very distinguished friend: Throwing stones at our compatriots is foolish. I applaud the invitation that "La Democracia" makes to all Puerto Ricans to suggest the ideas necessary to carry out the beautiful idea of uniting us all in the Homeland. That invitation is inspired by good faith and by the highest patriotism. Responding to it and in fulfillment of a civic duty, I allow myself to offer the following plan: First: Formally invite the Socialist Party to be part of the Puerto Rican Alliance. The reasons for not doing so presented in the alliance project between the Unionist and Republican Parties do not seem sufficient to me. Not doing so would be committing a preterition against a legally constituted Party, represented in our Legislature, and a signatory of the Joint Resolution, and whose representatives went to Washington and worked as members of the Joint Commission to collect the rights that were demanded in said resolution. This preterition will be capital, in the hands of the enemies of a good faith understanding between all Puerto Ricans and will bring down the noble end that is pursued, and instead of consolidating the Homeland in a beautiful unity, deeper divisions will arise to the detriment of the country. Second: Platform. A. Economic Part 1. Return our lands to Puerto Rican hands. 2. Industrialization of the country. 3. Develop maritime and commercial life to make Puerto Rico an essentially maritime country as indicated by its island condition. 4. Raise the standard of living of our workers. B. Cultural Part. 1. Promote the study of mechanical arts and physical and natural sciences. 2. Restore our culture, orienting young people towards the sources of our civilization. C. Political Part. (a) Transitory regime. 1. Elective governor without impediments of any kind. 2. Abolition of the Federal Court to unify our judicial system. 3. Creation of a Supreme Court with final jurisdiction in all cases except those involving the interpretation of American constitutional law and public international law. (b) Definition of status. 1. Formal commitment between all current parties for our Legislature to approve a Joint Resolution requesting the Congress of the United States to convene the people of Puerto Rico to a constituent convention. D. Administrative Part. 1. Selection of the best men for the positions, applying the Civil Service Law with absolute impartiality. 2. Creation of the judicial career, selecting men for it by rigorous position. To achieve this, it will be necessary to raise the salaries of judges and for the higher positions to be covered by the promotion of those already appointed, and for these to occupy their positions while they demonstrate good conduct in them. This measure will be effective in cleaning up the collective environment. 3. Preponderance in the insular administration of bona fide residents outside the capital to force it to concentrate its attention on the general interests of the country. Third: Procedure. A. Creation of mixed local boards representing the current parties in the proportion determined by the assemblies that said parties are to hold. B. Candidacies for local boards must be endorsed by a certain number of electors and these will be submitted to primaries in each municipality. C. Each local board will designate two representatives from its midst, who with the representatives designated by the local boards of the district, will constitute the district board. D. In general primaries, in each district, of three candidacies that the district board will submit to the electorate, three representatives, bonafide residents, will be elected for each of them, and these will constitute the Central Board of the Puerto Rican Alliance. This will have the power to enforce the plan approved by the assemblies of the current parties. So that it is free from official influence, it will have its seat in Ponce or in any district other than San Juan. E. Municipal candidates and candidates for the House will be selected in primaries of candidacies submitted to the electorate by the Local Board or by a certain number of electors. The number of candidacies that the Local Board must submit to the electorate will be three. F. In primaries in each district of the candidacies that the District Board submits to the electorate, or a certain number of electors, the senators for said district will be chosen. The District Board will submit three candidacies to the electorate. G. In general primaries throughout the country, the candidates for senators and representatives by accumulation and the candidates for elective insular positions will be chosen, from three candidacies that the Central Board will submit to the electorate, stipulating that the Senatorial District of San Juan may not have more than one senator or representative by accumulation. H. The change of residence invalidates the right to represent the city that granted it, be this a Local Board, a District Board, Municipality, Representative District or Senatorial District. I. The Central Board with a representative designated ad hoc by each District Board, will constitute the Board that will recommend to the executive the candidates that it will select for insular administrative positions. Fourth: distribution of power. This will be done on the basis of proportional representation according to the result of the 1920 elections. The general cleanup has to start with the decentralization of representation. The country's progress will be uniform and rapid. This is a patriotic understanding and requires new orientations that emanate from good faith and from the sacrifice of prejudices and vested interests. We can all well dispense with the current names, since there are no reasons for great pride for anyone when the partisan struggle of the last 25 years has reduced us to pariahs in our Homeland. You and Mr. Tous Soto have broken the collective inertia. The movement begins, and although we do not constitute a large people in territory or population, we can be great in material wealth, in art and sciences, and be at the forefront of civilization. Please accept this humble effort as proof of the appreciation that motivates the beautiful idea of rebuilding our Homeland. With all my consideration. Your friend and S.S., P. ALBIZU CAMPOS. IN PUERTO RICO A PLAN IS PROPOSED FOR THE ANNEXATION OF THAT COUNTRY' ALONG WITH CUBA AND HAITI TO THE UNITED STATES⁶ A PUERTO RICAN ALSO PROTESTS In addition to this vibrant and magnificent protest of the Cuban Consul, who has known how to come to the defense of our dignity, a distinguished Puerto Rican, Mr. P. Albizu Campos, answered Mr. Tous' manifesto with noble virility. "Convinced Mr. Tous -says Mr. Albizu Campos- that Americans do not esteem us as equals despite citizenship, but always desirous of seeing us tied to the Yankee imperial chariot, advises our acceptance in fact and contrary to law and effect maintains a project of amendment to the Constitution, to admit Puerto Rico as a "state" with representation but without a vote in the Congress, except in its own affairs. Such an amendment would well reflect the American attitude, but it is not moved by an ingenuity that allows us to unmask its hypocrisy. Even if the amendment were feasible, it is so humiliating that we accept a position of inequality, that this is enough to reject it outright. The most painful thing of all this, is that Mr. Tous is not satisfied with the sinking of his Homeland, but offers the United States a plan that would destroy the aspirations for independence of the great Filipino people, and that constitutes a gratuitous attack on our brother peoples in race, Cuba, Haiti and Santo Domingo, who with the sacrifice, the only saving thing, freed themselves from the clutches of conquest. Why, instead of facilitating the annexation of Cuba, Haiti and Santo Domingo, does he not protest the vandalic outrage of which the Dominican people are victims, of the promiscuous slaughter of thousands of Haitians, of the failed attempts against the sovereignty of Cuba after having sworn to defend it? He does not protest. We form a chain with those indomitable peoples, whose example we must imitate, and since we sink with pleasure, he believes that we must also drag them into the same abyss. This attitude is logical, after preaching so much to this unfortunate people that it is not capable of anything, comes the conviction of the moral inability to resist the brutal attack of the strong, and forgets that these men in other lands ARE NOT MADE OF GELATIN. It is dishonorable that Puerto Ricans serve as an instrument to facilitate the plan premeditated by American statesmen, to annex their Latin neighbors, with economic penetration, disorganizing their institutions and finally applying the bludgeon of military force." THE DISSOLUTION OF THE UNIONIST PARTY AND PUERTO RICAN NATIONALISM The Puerto Rican Alliance, fusion of the Parties that were called Unionist and Republican has placed the country in the dilemma of submitting to the dictatorship of the plutocracy or to the dictatorship of demagogy. The electoral right has been destroyed; the directory will decide who we should vote for in the next elections if we are to allow it to exercise the will it intends. When the electoral right is destroyed, the gesture of favoring women's suffrage is made. Dictatorships have used many subterfuges to impose themselves, but we never believed that they would have to use a woman's skirt as a shield. What is the purpose of a dictatorship in Puerto Rico? This is imposed only in moments of great crisis and to collect or protect fundamental collective rights when all ordinary means of government have failed. It is an extremely exceptional measure and is tolerated and sanctioned by an imperious necessity. Our people are accused of not being prepared for self-government. Their rulers deny them the opportunity to prepare themselves and exercise a veiled imperialism over them. To culminate their humiliation, their own children want to assume the gesture of dictators over them. Each political party in Puerto Rico should be a school of democracy. Apparently, it is an inconvenience to certain leaders of public opinion. What end does the dictatorship pursue? In the definitive agreements of the assemblies there is talk of the agrarian problem, the problem of the schools and other problems, for whose solution a dictatorship is not justified because today we have the powers to solve those problems. We are also told that the alliance will direct all its efforts to the consideration of full self-government to achieve the sovereignty of the people of Puerto Rico within the sovereignty of the United States. The authors of this phrase have explained to us that achieving full self-government is confined to obtaining the approval of the bill pending consideration before the Congress of the United States, by virtue of which Puerto Rico will be able to elect its own governor in 1928. But that same project provides that that governor may be removed by the President of the United States. The governor thus elected, will feel responsible to the President of the United States and not to the people who granted him his representation. We will achieve with his election to put one more puppet at the disposal of Yankee imperialism in Puerto Rico, which will thus be able to escape the responsibility of its bad government and the children of our country will bear it. Wise is Yankee politics that knows how to find good instruments for its execution! The debated phrase "sovereignty within sovereignty" some tell us that it means the federal "state" and others that it means free state

associated. Its authors offer interpretations that constitute an antithesis. It carries death within itself. Of course, it cannot refer to the federal "state", because it is neither a state nor sovereign. It is a mere province of the American nation. As the other interpretation is so contrary to this, we come to the conclusion that the phrase means nothing. It is a veil to conceal the colonialism that they want to implement with the consent of the men in whom we placed our trust. The War Department, which has disposition over life and property in Puerto Rico, has just published an official report in which it gives a complete narration of the policy of the United States in Puerto Rico from the Spanish-American War until now. We are told clearly that Puerto Rico will never be admitted into the American Union in accordance with all the precedents followed until now. Its right to constitute itself as a free nation is also denied. And it is cynically stated that American citizenship for us is only an imperial means to keep us subject to Yankee command. Our leaders seem resigned to the situation imposed on them by American Kaiserism, and for "conveniences", they want to submit their people to that will, inimical to their happiness and their dignity. Faithful to the imposed mandate, they have constituted the Alliance to formalize the colonialism already established. We have been told that the object is to clean up the political environment, to protect us against the socialist calamity, etc., etc., but no one has believed this, with the exception of the people who are interested in the constitution of the directorate. None of the militant parties will concern themselves with defending our collective personality and our inalienable right to constitute a free people among the free peoples of the world. The ideal of independence has died among the militant parties; they have played with our people. Its great majority is pro-independence to the bone. We offer the most exceptional spectacle: the people are the action, their leaders, the reaction; the people, the vanguard, their leaders, the baggage. All the effort of our leaders seems to have been limited to organizing hosts who, after being organized, have become afraid and have decided to surrender with their army so as not to incur the malevolence of the enemy. For the Unionist Party, whose soul was always nationalist, what has happened is death. It has been formally decreed by stipulating that the Alliance will be for an indefinite time and that all its official bodies will be suspended. No one will be able to convene the Unión de Puerto Rico to any meeting after this agreement. "The preservation of the insignia, the name, and the personality", is a skillful formula to maintain the cohesion of the hosts so that the directorate is not reduced to a pretentious skeleton. The truth is that the Unión de Puerto Rico has been dissolved and the so-called Republican Party has been constituted into a new party dominated by the plutocracy. No people could expect any benefit from this combination, and much less ours, which, excessively trusting, places its trust everywhere. The only goodness of said movement is the resurgence of Puerto Rican Nationalism. The new nationalism will be true. It will watch over the economic well-being of the working classes, return the lands to Puerto Rican hands, not allow the imposition of an exotic culture, and will not cease its effort until it reclaims the Homeland's dignity. This painful imposition has been invested with the language that is used to consecrate the great ideals. Strip the proposition of that beautiful clothing and you will find the macabre figure of a daring act committed by sons and the tranquility, of reconstruction. (sic). It will not be the plutocratic Alliance, nor will it be demagoguery that is imposed on this people. All of Puerto Rico will rise up with the Homeland ideal of a pure nationalism and will punish at the polls the men who have violated its trust. The Homeland is indestructible and will survive all impositions from its own or from strangers. PEDRO ALBIZU CAMPOS Ponce, Puerto Rico, May 12, 1924
