---
layout: text
lang: en
title: Nationalist Party President Comments on Governor Robert H. Gore's Inauguration
author: pedro-albizu-campos
author_name: Pedro Albizu Campos
date: 1933-01-01
source: Obras Escogidas 1923-1936 (Selected Works)
source_detail: "Pedro Albizu Campos, Obras Escogidas 1923-1936"
country: puerto-rico
permalink: /en/texts/pedro-albizu-campos/presidente-partido-nacionalista-comenta-toma-posesion-gobernador-robert
spanish_version: /es/textos/pedro-albizu-campos/presidente-partido-nacionalista-comenta-toma-posesion-gobernador-robert
collections: []
---

representative of the Partido Nacionalista, among other things of lesser importance, guaranteed to the Partido Liberal two senators, one representative, and a municipal government. He will not make mention because the liberal chief is currently dedicated to the politics of flattery towards the North American dictator Roosevelt. As a result of the veto, the Governor retains control of the electoral result. In the Junta Insular de Elecciones, the yanki representative and the delegates from the Partido Liberal and the Unión Republicana will have a vote. Provided that the liberals are willing to please the yanki government, they will have two votes against one in said body, but, the day that they attempt something that does not suit the yankis' interests, the votes against them will also be two. It is necessary to distinguish the liberals from their leadership. The chiefs of the party have a policy: to keep the yanki government content and they will not hesitate to disregard the interests of their party in certain municipalities, if by doing so they serve imperial politics. For illustration, we will cite the case of Guánica in the past elections. The candidate for mayor was affiliated with the Unión Republicana, pleasing to the Central Guánica, and, of course, to the yanki Government. To ensure his election, the Junta Insular de Elecciones was asked to move the polling places of Guánica to Ensenada where no one can enter, not even public officials, without prior permission from the administrator of the Central Guánica, who in that zone, is absolute king over lives and property. The local committees of the Partido Nacionalista, the Socialista, and the liberals opposed the move. So serious was the matter that these three committees requested and obtained a public hearing before the Junta Insular de Elecciones. The matter submitted to a vote in the Junta Insular voted in favor of the pretensions of the Central Guánica and the yanki government: the representative of the Partido Liberal, that of the Unión Republicana, and of course, the president of the Junta, who is the representative of the Government. Against voted the delegates of the Partido Nacionalista and the Partido Socialista. The supreme liberal leadership consciously sacrificed its own electorate of Guánica to serve one of those inexplicable prevailing concupiscences. The Partido Liberal has obtained nothing with the veto. In the Junta Insular de Elecciones it is at the mercy of the will and caprice of the Governor. It will have to please him in everything to achieve something. And it may be that at a given moment, the electorate of a liberal municipality finds itself with a vote in the Junta Insular against it, of three votes against none, because the representative of its political group before said Junta, votes in accordance with the instructions of the Junta Central del Partido Liberal, as happened in the cited case of Guánica. The Partido Liberal will not have better luck than its predecessor the Unionista and "it will be strangled in full infancy in a bed of perfect and inexplicable budgetary concupiscences by the surprising kindness and cunning generosity of the yanki Demócrata party." 266 And this longed-for budgetary reverie is almost a delirium. Travieso, honorary president of the Partido Liberal, conservative, pro-yanki, annexationist, and spokesperson of his party delivered in all lights to the perpetuation of the yanki regime, has just announced the need to convert the Partido Liberal into a boricua branch of the yanki Partido "Demócrata". As his words of today in this newspaper are not to be wasted, we reproduce them verbatim: "Do you believe that the Partido Liberal should affiliate with the Partido Demócrata of the United States?" We interrogated him and he answered us: "I believe that between the Partido Liberal and the Partido Demócrata there are many points of contact and community of ideals. The only point that would be in disharmony is that referring to the political status for Puerto Rico. On one hand the Partido Demócrata has in its platform statehood for our island and the Partido Liberal proclaims independence. It could be that in an exchange of impressions between representatives of one and the other party a formula is found that harmonizes these tendencies." The only difference between the Partido Demócrata and the Partido Liberal is the political status. Well, almost nothing. Travieso knows that this nonsense can be arranged after an exchange of impressions. And it is that he is the guiding and necessary figure of a group that, calling itself independentista and liberal, has as directors reactionary spokespersons of a colonial regime. Nationalism obliged them to put on the mask of independence to avoid their political collapse. The farce cannot last much longer, and it will be necessary to act in order to participate in that "noble" budget that obliges certain men to everything. Soon we will have "liberal democracy." On the path of apology for foreign tyranny, Barceló sets forth a theory in consonance with his politics of submission to the regime. He affirms that minorities should not have protection and that their existence should be at the mercy of the majorities. All wise men maintain that laws are made for the guarantee of minorities, because majorities can guarantee themselves and intend to crush minorities by force. Of course, the liberal leadership is guided by something other than respect for the rights of others. It needs too much of the budget. For that reason, Nationalism must be strangled, and its head offered on a platter to the yanki dictator Roosevelt. Remember Barceló that he tried to do that when it was the Hardings, Coolidges, and Hoovers who governed the United States, but he failed and could never inspire confidence in the North American despots of whom he merited only contempt. Empires combat their natural enemy, the nationalist cause, but they always respect it. The oppressors desire to measure themselves with the dignity and valor that represent the men who embody the patriotism of the intervened nation. As no empire can maintain itself without the cooperation of the 267 natives of the country occupied by force, they make use of them but they despise them. Nationalism is a principle of Homeland affirmation that once it sprouts there is no power that can crush it. It appeals, in the first instance, to the electoral struggle, because it is sensible to exhaust the resources of peace but it has never limited its action before the impediments that the empire and the cipayos have thrown before its advance. The nation knew on the night of April 16, 1932 that Nationalism lives its motto: valor and sacrifice for its flag. It is in the interest of all not to obstruct its peaceful development. It represents the integral rights of all Puerto Ricans. Puerto Rico is standing. The Homeland was never represented by those who were at the service of its enemies the invaders. Those who had the motto spoke in its name: Valor and sacrifice to make its independence respected. The Liberating Army has five thousand positions filled. P. ALBIZU CAMPOS THE PRESIDENT OF THE PARTIDO NACIONALISTA COMMENTS ON THE TAKING OF POSSESSION OF THE GOVERNOR ROBERT H. GORE⁸⁵ "The monarchical absolutism of the eighteenth century also had itself consecrated, by force. With the doctrine of the divine right of kings, it imposed the invocation of divinity so that tyranny would be clothed in sanction. A gross blasphemy was perpetrated. Despotism has no sanction, and it is ridiculed when it invokes it. It is only respectable when it speaks through the mouth of its cannons. As foreign despotism has no justification whatsoever, it has never invoked divine power to impose itself. The North American empire that has profaned everything in its advance through extermination, had to be the exception. We have just witnessed the inauguration of the new chief of the yanki intervention. The outgoing governor, Presbyterian and Mason and affiliated with the yanki Republican party hands over the imposed power, to the new imperial leader, Catholic and Knight of Columbus, and member of the North American Demócrata party. Two bishops, one Catholic and one Protestant, bless the ceremony and formulate the divine invocation. The actors are, of course, all yankis, who, despite their antagonistic political and religious convictions, reveal an impressive unity of purpose to maintain the North American empire in Puerto Rico, even if to do so it is necessary to appeal to God through all imaginable religious avenues. It is good to remember that the new chief of the intervention, despite being Catholic and a Knight of Columbus is the representative of the North American dictator, Roosevelt, who is Protestant and Mason. The empire manifests itself united before us. It breaks, deliberately, the routine of appointing Protestant and Masonic representatives, and opts for a Catholic Knight of Columbus, attentive exclusively to its policy of absorption. The unwary could not suspect that the government of the United States would appeal, for the exercise of its devastating imperialism, to the cooperation of North American Catholicism. It is known that that empire is governed by a Masonic and Protestant oligarchy that postpones as much as it can, its Catholic and Jewish fellow citizens. It is yanki constitutional dogma -so natural that there has been no need to consign it in writing- that no Catholic can occupy the presidency of the empire. An illegitimate power makes use of all means to impose itself, and, does not hesitate to use its own enemies for its ends. When its victims lend themselves to being voluntary collaborators, an identification of purpose is manifested against who is supposed to be the common enemy. The yankis, Catholics or Protestants, Masons or Knights of Columbus, with what happened in the taking of possession of the command of the North American forces, have revealed that unity of imperialist ends against the Puerto Rican nation. The response to that united enemy front, is the united front of the Homeland. A certain routine of imperial policy is broken only in the presence of necessity. The empire always makes use of suitable representatives who can strengthen it in the intervened nations. The militant Nationalism of Filipinas and Puerto Rico has imposed this shift in the selection of the chiefs of the intervention in both intervened nations. It is about weakening the invocation of the traditionalist forces with invading influences that may mystify the Puerto Ricans. In lending itself to that maneuver of yanki imperialism, the North American clergy residing in Puerto Rico, is violating mandatory provisions of the Church. The North American Catholic priest who serves as an instrument to yanki imperialism in Puerto Rico is not worthy of the ecclesiastical investiture. As that serious evil can ruin the superior interests of the Church, it is foreseen and addressed with provisions that oblige the natural clergy of the intervening country to sacrifice themselves, if it were necessary, in defense of the rights of the intervened nation. It is the only way to prevent the priesthood from ending in sacrilege. We are facing a clear and dangerous fact for the Homeland. The North American clergy, Catholic and Protestant, is only an instrument of the imperialism of its country. We have to fight it on all fronts. Its cooperation with the yanki empire has reached the extreme, of voluntarily offering and in solemn public act when assuming the command of the intervention a new representative, the concurrence of its moral force. The imperialist attitude of the yanki Protestant clergy is known by all so that it requires more comments. Now, that the new governor is Catholic, it is necessary to clarify the imperialist tendencies of a part of the North American Catholic clergy. Here a Catholic religious community has been established, which is called Redentorista. With centers in Mayagüez, Guayama, Caguas, Puerta de Tierra. In their schools that follow the same official system, -teaching in English, knowledge of yanki things and ignorance of the rest of the world, the greatest attraction towards everything North American is maintained, with constant display of the North American flag in their classrooms. They hoist it over the towers of the church itself, in full defiance of public opinion. The friars follow practices alien to those ordered by the Latin Council to which Puerto Rico belongs. Their attitude, far from being a manifestation of Christian meekness, is of haughtiness with an air of ridiculous superiority. As they have been faithful collaborators of the regime, in their houses the yanki governors were always splendidly entertained, although they were all Protestants and Masons, 270 revealing that unity of imperialist purpose against the Puerto Ricans. This desire for command and to possess material things that was already organized for the pontificate of His Holiness, León XIII, gave rise to the formation of the heresy called Americanism, which deserved to be condemned by this wise pontiff. That attitude is alive and has begun to act aggressively in our country. We notify you that it will not be tolerated. To the inaugural words of the new chief of the intervention, who has received such religious investiture, we will make a brief gloss. The yanki empire fights to displace us in our own country. It has appealed to neo-Malthusianism, to emigration, to diseases, to everything that promotes our extinction. It has already been said: "the yankis are interested in the cage but not the birds." From the armchair of the palace of Santa Catalina, in whose shadow the Puerto Rican Nation arose, consecrated to the ideals of pure Christianity, a people of fine sentiment has contemplated a yanki leader advocating publicly demoralizing practices such as neo-Malthusianism. It is to congratulate mister Gore for having rectified his immediate successor in the post. The new governor assumes a citizen community between the Puerto Ricans and the North Americans. He is deeply mistaken. From one end of the country to the other, there exists inextinguishable hatred against the North American military occupation. Grave is his error in believing that Puerto Rico has been the object of North American largesse. He must study the statistics of our commerce and he will find that the nation has always had a favorable commercial balance for thirty-five consecutive years, including the last four, characterized by the deepest crisis. That favorable balance amounts to a sum that exceeds one thousand two hundred million dollars, enough for Puerto Rico to be today a financial power of the first order. But yanki capitalism, protected by its government, has taken that enormous profit and instead of our country being an emporium of wealth, it has sixty percent of its population unemployed and the entire country mortgaged to yanki banks. Mister Gore says well that there is a need for emigration. What we do not agree on is the selection of people. All foreigners must leave Puerto Rico immediately, starting with the yanki colony that exceeds two thousand parasitic individuals, representatives of the yanki interests that control ninety percent of our wealth. Puerto Ricans have rights in their Homeland that they will make respected and no one plans to emigrate, and much less to a place like Florida, governed by laws that deny the electoral vote to any person of color; laws that declare null any marriage between people of different races, that convert into a public crime punishable by imprisonment that conjugal union and condemn to illegitimacy the children born therein, laws that impose the forced separation of races in theaters, churches, places of amusement, transportation vehicles, etc.; laws crowned by the most humane of the laws of barbarism, the law of lynching. A grave illusion has taken possession of Mister Gore. He believes he has true powers that he can exercise with responsibility before his own conscience. It is necessary that he observe that he must abide at all times by the instructions he receives from that den of conspiracy against Puerto Rico, which they call the Negociado de Asuntos Insulares. As a matter of conscience, we must remind him that in conscience he cannot exercise foreign despotism. He speaks again of a dead theme among us, such as annexationism to convert Puerto Rico into a yanki province ("state" sic), Everyone already knows that annexation is reprehensible in any form, and especially today, when the United States is governed by the personal dictatorship of Roosevelt, a dictatorship that everyone expects to become a firm political institution. Mister Gore should not feel overwhelmed by duties of his or of his Homeland towards the Puerto Ricans. He can be calm in that regard. The United States of North America has a single duty to fulfill with Puerto Rico, and, it is to immediately withdraw its armed forces from our territory. We know that that does not depend on Mister Gore. Nor are the yankis our doctors -we already know what North American doctors come for- nor are we the Puerto Ricans sick to be cured by such doctors. Puerto Rico is a nation of superior civilization and culture and does not need mentors mired in barbarism such as that prevailing in more than half of the United States of the type existing in Florida to which the Puerto Ricans must go again, -reminiscing the immortal Ponce de León-, to reintegrate it into Christian civilization. P. ALRIZU CAMPOS 272 THE ACTS TO BE CELEBRATED TOMORROW IN THE CITY OF LARES BY THE PARTIDO NACIONALISTA TO COMMEMORATE THE DATE OF SEPTEMBER 23RD⁸⁶ PROCLAMATION On the glorious ephemeris of the revolution of Lares, next Saturday, September 23rd, the national assembly will be celebrated in Lares to commemorate the sixty-fifth anniversary of the proclamation of the republic and the sesquicentennial of the birth of the Liberator, Simón Bolívar. "This entire year has been especially dedicated to the study of the genial personality of the excellent man that to equal his work it would be necessary to create another world to liberate", as proclaimed the wise Chuquihuanca, when he had the privilege of pronouncing the historic and inimitable speech to welcome the Liberator, in commemoration of his triumphal entry into Azángaro, Perú. Before the memory of the heroes and martyrs of the revolution of Lares, nationalism renders its homage to the Liberator, who put his genius and his sword at the disposal of the cause of the independence of Puerto Rico. All free nations render cult this year to his sublime figure, because the salvation of the peoples is in the cult of their independence and to the memory of the men who consecrated themselves to it. Puerto Rico is free, independent, and sovereign by its right and by its will, and fulfills the duty that is the exclusive patrimony of free men. Lares is the Bolivarian repercussion of Ayacucho in the Antilles. In that heroic deed, the American homelands were represented by their blood, very especially Venezuela, which was the cradle of the Liberator. And it is that those illustrious men knew the greatness of this archipelago that served as a base for the expansion of Christian civilization in America, and is today a fortress of resistance against the barbarism that comes to us from the North. It is fitting, then, that before the memory of the heroes and martyrs of the Revolution, who offered their lives to give us the only example to follow to suppress foreign intervention, the nation renews its faith in the ideals of Bolívar that are concretized in the union of the nations of our race to impose their hegemony for the diffusion of the civilization that the world needs. Given in San Juan de Puerto Rico on the twenty-first day of the month of September of the year 1933, sixty-fifth year of the proclamation of the Republic. THE NATIONAL JUNTA P. ALBIZU CAMPOS President José LAMEIRO General Secretary 273 THE ACTS CELEBRATED IN LARES IN COMMEMORATION OF THE REVOLUTION OF '68 AND OF THE BIRTH OF SIMON BOLIVAR⁸⁷ By Juan Antonio Corretjer "In the name of God Almighty, creator and protector of nationalities, I declare open this fourth national assembly to commemorate the date of the Proclamation of the Republic and the sesquicentennial of the birth of the Liberator." It is the President of the Party who has opened the great assembly. SPEECH OF MR. ALBIZU CAMPOS The pilgrim cannot reproduce the President's speech. Who can? But the fervent disciple, trusting in superior forces, will try to gloss the ideological plan, the mental itinerary of the marvelous dissertation. And the defects, the gaps, the commons of thought and expression, will only be of the disciple. CONCEPT OF RESPONSIBILITY. "To render homage to the truth one must have consecrated oneself to the truth. Only those who have not departed from the criterion that informed the men of '68, to raise, in the glimmer of freedom, the spiritual monument of the Republic, are worthy of rendering homage to their memory." "The mediators of the Homeland, those who have never neither felt nor meditated for it, communicate to the people their lack of love and their ignorance. And as these are components of irresponsibility, the irresponsible leaders make the people irresponsible." "But the naked lie cannot be preached to the people, and for this reason those of betrayal adorn it with appearances of truth. But, what is the naked truth? When the people elect, in the elections, their representatives, they do not elect them to represent them, as they suppose, but to represent, behind their pain, the interests of the intervening powers. They send representatives and senators to a false Legislature, so that, for a miserable prebenda, they serve as a demolishing nut of their own brothers. They elect municipal assembly members, so that they finish 274 ruining the municipalities. And, when the people line up along the highways, empty of bread and destitute of home, they cannot resort to their elected representatives, but to charity, because those men, subservient to the intervening power against their people, are limited in their action by submission to a foreign law, made to demolish a people within their own territory and with their own resources." "But sometimes some representatives of the people decide to act in Puerto Rican such as the Municipal Assembly of Lares in the Resolution declaring guests of honor of the city to the pilgrims of the Nation and it is in the entrails of that procedure where the honor and the perspective of the happiness of the Homeland reside." CONCEPT OF THE FREEDOM OF SPEECH "Those who live from the nourishment of betrayal, when they want to make a panegyric of the regime, begin with a hymn to the so-called freedom of speech. Well, gentlemen, freedom of speech without freedom of action, is prison, is slavery, is death. If a man's property is confiscated, his home is destroyed and he is imprisoned, and, when he is behind bars, with a sentinel at the door, smiling and armed, he is allowed to renounce the world, and man and society, and perhaps if in desperation he reaches the painful borders of blasphemy, that man has freedom of speech. If a man is condemned to the death penalty, and that man, on the scaffold, asks to be allowed to speak before being executed, that man speaks, and that man has freedom of speech. "That is the case of Puerto Rico. It is in jail, and the sentinel with a cynical smile lets it speak. It is already on the scaffold, and the blue-eyed executioner lets it speak." "And with that refrain of freedom of speech they want to interrupt the advance of freedom. Why don't the panegyrists on the payroll of the regime speak of freedom of action, which is freedom of defense, freedom of attack, which is freedom? They come with the shameful ritornello of freedom of speech. Only animals, gentlemen, lack freedom of speech! Only man received the infinite privilege of the Word! As an animal is treated the man who is wanted to be humiliated attributing to his enemy the domain of his word! CONCEPT OF FOREIGNNESS "In Puerto Rico the yankis are foreigners, who, by force, detain our sovereignty. All friends of the independence of Puerto Rico are Puerto Ricans. There are foreigners in Puerto Rico who are our brothers. There are, for example, Spaniards, many Spaniards, who by origin, by tradition, and by race, are our brothers. And they are also by ideology. The Spaniards who unfortunately there are the Spaniards who walk arm in arm with the power that wanted to humiliate Spain in '98; the Spaniards who walk arm in arm with the enemies of the Homeland of their children, those are not Spaniards. Spain has never been a country of pork butchers. Those pork butchers are from Chicago. Spain is the Homeland of historical vision par excellence." 275 CONCEPT OF LARES

"In Lares coincides the proper significance of the word with the historical significance, because Lares means Homeland." CONCEPT OF OBEDIENCE "Revolution is not disorder, but the suppression of disorder. It requires, therefore, the institution of a hierarchy, and respect for that hierarchy. Obedience is not submission, but humility, which is an exclusive virtue of free men. Humility is greatness, and we are only truly great when we are great in humility. Obedience is an active form of Faith. Therefore, an exemplary cadet will be one who enters Glory through obedience, which is the door that leads to Faith, mother of all Valor." BOLIVAR "Along with the duty and the right to pay homage to the martyrs of Lares, we have that of paying homage to the memory of the Liberator. He thought of forging with his sword, the independence of Cuba and Puerto Rico. But then the United States intervened, offering its fleet to Spain so that it would retain its Antilles provinces. The moment had not yet arrived in which the United States would use that same fleet against the crown of Spain! Thus the Yankee Empire interrupted Bolivar's liberating plan." "Today we have planted in the Plaza de la Revolución, a small tree, son of the sacred tamarind under whose shade Bolivar rested his last days. In the house of a Spanish hidalgo, who was a colonel in the Army of Spain, don Joaquín de Mier, the man for whom "the world of Columbus ceased to be Spanish" went to die. Thus Providence willed it, so that with the passing of the glorious to eternal glory, all wounds would heal, and eternal would be the spiritual union of all Hispanic peoples." VALERO "This is the traditional nobility of the Race. Our great soldier, Marshal don Antonio de Valero y Bernabe, whose liberating sword shone in the sun of five nations; friend and subordinate of Bolivar in the campaign of Perú, represents for us the continental concretion of our spirit. He, in company with General Solón, was entrusted with the siege of the Plaza del Callao. Without the taking of Callao, Ayacucho cannot exist. The Spanish general Rodils, defender of the plaza, knew it. He knew that while he resisted, it was the Spanish Pacific, and the door to revolutionary America was open to Spanish reserves. And he fought in Callao with a heroism unparalleled in history. But the siege was maintained. And the besieged who had a large number of elderly men, women, and children within its walls, threw them into the field, so that they would be picked up by the besiegers. Then Solón, who was a hard soldier, who knew that this action meant redoubling Spanish resistance and endangering American independence, refused to receive them. But Valero intervened, and there was such a strong incident between the two, that Solón filed charges against Valero before the supreme general commander Bolivar. But Valero's defense was so clear, so luminous, and so noble that Solón withdrew the charges, closing among those three great men the most emotional incident of the war. That is, Puerto Ricans, the spirit of noble and disinterested heroism, which must inform the Puerto Rican Revolution." INDEPENDENCE "Independence is not made with applause. It is made with deeds. In our favor we have the reason of the world that sees in the slavery of a people, of a man, such a deep injury that it concerns the entire world. But our work must be done here. Puerto Rico is enslaved because the United States holds our sovereignty, and because there are Puerto Ricans who allow it. But there are already Puerto Ricans who do not allow it, and neither the fleet nor the cannons of any empire are strong enough to stop a people in its determination to be free."
